# 0. Support deploying images from Private Quay.io repositories

Date: 2023-03-16

## Status

Provisional

## Context

* As a user, I would expect StoneSoup to generate a private Quay.io image repository if my source code repository is  private.
* As a user, I would expect StoneSoup to gracefully deploy images that were pushed to private Quay.io repositories in every relevant environment.


## Decision

### Overview

1. This proposal builds on the capabilties of the https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/image-controller which sets up a Quay.io image repository per `Component` and 'downloads' a robot account token into the user's namespace for builds to be able to push to it.

2. This proposal builds on the capabilities of SPI's `RemoteSecret` API. See https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/book/pull/70/files


#### When a new `Component is created

1. A new Quay.io image repository and robot account token is made available in the namespace that would only be able to "pull" the `Component`'s image.
2. The image-controller labels the `Secret` with the name `Application`/`Component` the `Secret` is associated with. 


#### When an expression of intent to deploy an `Application` to an `Environment`


1. Watch for creation of new `SnapshotEnvironmentBindings`.
2. Query the 'pull' `Secret` generated by the image-controller. 
3. Label the `Secret` with the name of the `Environment` ( ex, `spi.appstudio.redhat.com/target-environment: prod`) the `Secret` needs to be copied to, based on the `SnapshotEnvironmentBinding` CR.
3. SPI generates a `RemoteSecret` CR referencing the 'pull' `Secret` above. ( See https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/book/pull/70/files )
3. SPI reconciles the `RemoteSecret` CR, copies over the 'pull' `Secret` to the relevant cluster/namespace and links it to the `default` `serviceaccount.

TODO: Which Stonesoup controller should be doing (1), (2) and (3) 

#### When recovering from a disaster or credentials' exposure

1. Request re-generation of the Quay.io robot account token by setting the annotation `image.redhat.com/generate: 'true'` on the relevant Components.
  The resulting Quay.io API call automatically revokes the old token.


## Consequences

1. The reference to the `Secret` is not visible in the GitOps repo.
2. The 'disaster recovery' scenario would bank on requesting a re-creation of the image repository credentials, which would then be propagated to the relevant Environments.
3. ~This process doesn't yet use a secret storage mechanism like SPI / Vault and the tech debt needs to be factored into future plans for improvement~
4. Image Controller would have to create/generate another secret (mapped to a yet another robot account) that only supports pulling of images. 
